ARTICLE
Lawyers for the six Baltimore police officers charged in connection with the death of Freddie Gray unleashed a personal and professional broadside on Friday against the prosecutor who brought the charges, accusing her and her office of being riven by conflicts of interest and alleging that she had betrayed professional standards.
The defense motion also seeks dismissal of the charges -- which include second-degree murder, manslaughter and assault -- against the six officers.
If that request is not granted, then the motion asks for the removal of the prosecutor, Marilyn J. Mosby, the state's attorney in Baltimore, and the appointment of an independent prosecutor to determine how the case proceeds.
''Rarely in the history of any criminal case has a prosecutor so directly maintained so many conflicts of interest,'' the defense lawyers stated in the motion.
The motion adds: ''At best, the charges levied against these officers are extraordinary prosecutorial overreaching.
At worst, they are something far more nefarious.''
The lawyers' 109-page document marks the first full-throated defense that any of the six officers have had since Ms. Mosby announced the charges during a nationally televised news conference on May 1 after several days of civil unrest over Mr. Gray's death.
Mr. Gray was injured while in police custody on April 12 and died a week later.
The defense motion came on the same day as Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch announced that the Justice Department had started an investigation into the Baltimore Police Department to determine whether it engages in systematic discrimination, civil rights violations and excessive use of force.
The investigation by the department's Civil Rights Division is separate from an inquiry already underway into the death of Mr. Gray.
Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake and other city officials requested the broader inquiry, known as a ''pattern or practice'' investigation, and Police Commissioner Anthony W. Batts said he would welcome it.
''It was clear that recent events, including the tragic, in-custody death of Freddie Gray, had led to a serious erosion of public trust,'' Ms. Lynch said on Friday at a news conference in Washington.
''The investigation will focus on allegations that Baltimore Police Department officers use excessive force, including deadly force, conduct unlawful searches, seizures and arrest, and engage in discriminatory policing.''
The city police and another arm of the Justice Department, the Community Oriented Policing Services Office, were already collaborating on a plan for police reform.
That plan was expected to result in a preliminary report in the next few weeks.
Ms. Lynch said the civil rights inquiry effectively puts an end to that effort, though the community policing office will continue to provide some assistance to the Baltimore police.
''The information is going to be folded into the pattern and practice investigation,'' she said.
''We will not have the collaborative reform report.''
Collaborative reform produces nonbinding recommendations, while a civil rights investigation can be a more adversarial process, and one that often ends with court-ordered changes and independent oversight of police departments.
''If unconstitutional policies or practices are found, we will seek a court-enforceable agreement,'' Ms. Lynch said.
''Our goal is to work with the community, public officials and law enforcement alike, to create a stronger, better Baltimore.''
Explaining why the earlier project was insufficient, she said federal officials had found that both the Baltimore Police Department's internal problems, and ''the community's rather frayed trust, to use an understatement,'' were worse than expected.
As a result, she said, ''rather than examining whether the Police Department violated good policies, we will examine if they violated the Constitution and the community's civil rights.''
The motion filed by the lawyers for the six police officers attacks Ms. Mosby in three principal areas: It accuses her of using ''inciting rhetoric'' in announcing the charges that betrayed a motivation other than the pursuit of justice, constituting a violation of state rules of professional conduct.
The defense lawyers also argue that Ms. Mosby was wrong to assert that the arrest of Mr. Gray was itself illegal, suggesting that regardless of whether the knife that he possessed was lawful under Maryland state law, it was illegal under Baltimore city ordinances, and for that reason the officers had reasonable grounds to arrest.
But the sharpest vitriol in the document was reserved for attacking the integrity of Ms. Mosby and her office for alleged conflicts of interest in the case, including the lawyers' claim that Ms. Mosby may have brought the charges to help her husband, Nick Mosby, a city councilman whose district was hit with rioting and violence.
''It is inconceivable that Mrs. Mosby was not influenced by the challenges presented to her husband as a community leader of neighborhoods that were literally 'up in flames,''' the defense lawyers wrote.
They also asserted that Billy Murphy, a prominent Baltimore lawyer who is representing the Gray family, has been ''a close friend, financial supporter and attorney for Mrs.
Mosby.''
The defense lawyers also said that the state's attorney's office should be recused because a top prosecutor in the office ''is in a relationship'' with a local television reporter, who they say may be called as a witness.
A spokeswoman for Ms. Mosby's office did not respond to an email or a phone message.