ARTICLE
Democrat Martin O'Malley joined the 2016 presidential race on Saturday.
Here are six things to know about the former Maryland governor:
Winning streak
He may enter the 2016 Democratic presidential race as an underdog to Hillary Clinton, but O'Malley is likely not lacking in confidence when it comes to seeking elective office.
He narrowly lost his first bid for office in 1990 -- a state Senate race -- but has worked his way up the ranks of Baltimore city and Maryland state politics ever since, winning elections for city council, mayor and governor.
Inspiration for
'The Wire'?
Fans of the critically acclaimed HBO series The Wire no doubt remember the rise of Tommy Carcetti, the ambitious Baltimore city councilman who wins a surprise victory to become mayor.
Sound familiar?
Show creator David Simon maintains that Carcetti was a composite of multiple politicians, O'Malley included.
O'Malley himself is critical of any comparison to the fictional Carcetti, telling MSNBC in 2009: "I'm the antidote to The Wire."
Rock band
O'Malley is a longtime member of a Celtic rock band named O'Malley's March in which he plays guitar and sings.
The group, formed in 1988, has performed at the White House.
Mayoral tenure
O'Malley's record as mayor was in the spotlight in recent weeks following the unrest that gripped Baltimore after the death of Freddie Gray, a black man who died of an injury suffered while in police custody.
O'Malley defended his tenure and "zero tolerance" policies on policing.
"I did not dedicate my life to making Baltimore a safer and more just place because it was easy," O'Malley told Chuck Todd on Meet the Press in early May.
"And I am more inclined and more deeply motivated now to address what's wrong with our country and what needs to be healed and what needs to be fixed."
Family life
O'Malley's wife, Katie Curran O'Malley, is a district court judge in Baltimore.
The couple have four children.
Martin O'Malley was born in Washington, D.C., on Jan. 18, 1963.
His father, Thomas M. O'Malley, was an attorney and served as as a bombardier in the Army Air Forces during World War II.
He died in 2006.
O'Malley's mother, Barbara, has worked as a receptionist for retiring Maryland Sen. Barbara Mikulski for nearly three decades.
Clinton supporter
in 2008
He'll be running against her in 2016, but O'Malley was an early supporter of Hillary Clinton's 2008 presidential campaign, endorsing the then-New York senator in May 2007.