ARTICLE
A Baltimore grand jury returned indictments against the six officers charged this month in the arrest and death of Freddie Gray, who died of spinal injuries he suffered in police custody, allowing the state's attorney to press ahead with the most serious charges despite criticism that she was part of an "overzealous prosecution."
Prosecutors presented evidence to the grand jury over the course of two weeks, Baltimore State's Attorney Marilyn Mosby said.
The charges were largely the same as the ones her office first filed May 1 following an independent investigation, though there were some changes.
Reckless endangerment charges were added, while false imprisonment charges were removed.
The case now moves to Baltimore Circuit Court, where the officers will be arraigned on July 2.
All remain free on bail.
Gray, 25, was arrested April 12 after running from officers on patrol.
His death seven days later led to widespread protests that gave way to rioting and deployment of the National Guard.
After Gray's death, the Justice Department announced a civil rights investigation of the Baltimore Police Department to search for discriminatory policing practices and examine allegations that officers too often use excessive force and make unconstitutional searches and arrests.
In high-profile police-involved cases in Ferguson, Mo., and Staten Island, N.Y., prosecutors deferred to grand juries, which declined to bring charges.
Mosby's move to file criminal charges earlier this month set up Thursday's indictment as a largely procedural move.
Though it is unclear exactly how Gray suffered fatal injuries including a partially severed spine, the medical examiner has ruled his death a homicide, and Mosby has accused each of the officers of misconduct for "failure to perform their duty regarding the safety of a prisoner."
The grand jury added charges of reckless endangerment to the counts each officer faces, while those facing charges of false imprisonment saw those charges removed.
Because grand jury proceedings are secret, it was unclear whether the amended charges were the result of the prosecution's request or changes made by the grand jurors themselves.
Those charged are: Officer Caesar Goodson, Officer William Porter, Lt. Brian Rice, Sgt.
Alicia White, Officer Edward Nero and Officer Garrett Miller.
In the neighborhood where Gray was arrested, the news was met more with a shrug than a cheer.
"We ain't worried about the indictment.
We want a conviction," said Michael Banks, 44.
Noche Diaz, who said he moved to Baltimore from New York to join the protests, called the indictment "only a first step."
"The only thing that got the charges in the first place was when people rose up," he said.
"There's going to be a need to continue and renew that fight."