ARTICLE
A 31-year-old woman and a young boy were fatally shot Thursday, becoming Baltimore's 37th and 38th homicide victims this month, the city's deadliest in 15 years.
Meanwhile, arrests have plunged: Police are booking fewer than half the number of people they pulled off the streets last year.
Arrests were already declining before Freddie Gray died on April 19 of injuries he suffered in police custody, but they dropped sharply thereafter, as his death unleashed protests, riots, the criminal indictment of six officers and a civil rights investigation by the U.S. Justice Department that has officers working under close scrutiny.
West Baltimore residents worry they've been abandoned by the officers they once accused of harassing them, leaving some neighborhoods like the Wild West without a lawman around.
"Before it was overpolicing.
Now there's no police," said Donnail Lee, 34, who lives in the Gilmor Homes, the public housing complex where Gray, 25, was chased down.
"People feel as though they can do things and get away with it.
I see people walking with guns almost every single day, because they know the police aren't pulling them up like they used to."
Police Commissioner Anthony Batts said his officers "are not holding back," despite encountering dangerous hostility in the Western District.
"Our officers tell me that when officers pull up, they have 30 to 50 people surrounding them at any time," Batts said.
Baltimore was seeing a slight rise in homicides this year even before Gray's death April 19.
But the 38 homicides so far in May is a major spike, after 22 in April, 15 in March, 13 in February and 23 in January.
With one weekend still to go, May 2015 is already the deadliest month in 15 years, surpassing the November 1999 total of 36.
Ten of May's homicides happened in the Western District, which has had as many homicides in the first five months of this year as it did all of last year.
Even before Gray's death, police were making between 25 and 28 percent fewer arrests each month than they made in the same month last year.
But so far in May, arrests are down roughly 56 percent.
Police booked just 1,045 people in the first 19 days of May, an average of 55 a day.
In the same time period last year, police arrested 2,396 people, an average of 126 a day.
In fact, police did not make any arrests in the triple digits between April 22 and May 19, except on two occasions: On April 27, when protests gave way to rioting, police arrested 246 people.
On May 2, the last day of a citywide curfew, police booked 140 people.
At a news conference Wednesday, Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake said there are "a lot of reasons why we're having a surge in violence."
"Other cities that have experienced police officers accused or indicted of crimes, there's a lot of distrust and a community breakdown," Rawlings-Blake said.
"The result is routinely increased violence.
"It's clear that the relationship between the commissioner and the rank and file is strained," she added.
"He's working very hard to repair that relationship."