ARTICLE
Two days after Freddie Gray was buried and Baltimore erupted, the city’s newly anointed Teacher of the Year returned to his reopened middle school.
And scrapped his social studies lesson plans.
Ryan Kaiser, an Omaha native with 16 years of experience in Omaha and Baltimore classrooms, knew students needed a forum, some gentle guidance and a chance to make sense of what had just happened to their world.
Baltimore was still reeling from the unrest that had left 200 people arrested, 100 cops injured, 170 cars and 250 businesses burned.
Soldiers were still on the streets.
School had been called off for a day.
A curfew was still in effect.
And in a first for Major League Baseball, the Orioles were planning to play that day in an empty stadium.
It seemed like everyone in Baltimore was touched by the violence and mayhem.
So Mr. Kaiser returned to the classroom sure of only one thing.
He was definitely not going to teach about the European Union as he had planned.
The day called for a lesson much closer to home.
***
You don’t earn Teacher of the Year for rigidly adhering to lesson plans.
Mr. Kaiser won this award for everything he does inside the classroom.
And out.
He runs the debate team.
He works on a state committee on social studies.
He takes students on 20 to 30 field trips — yes, 20 to 30 — a year.
He writes the curriculum for the White House Visitor Center.
In the summer, he runs a camp that explores the rich history of Baltimore, one of the oldest cities in the U.S.
So perhaps the most relevant word in Teacher of the Year is the last one.
Mr. Kaiser is teaching all year.
Kaiser is the third generation in a family of educators.
His grandmother, Martha May Purdy, taught in Omaha Public Schools.
His parents, Beth and Dennis, retired from long careers that began with a 1960s program called the National Teacher Corps and ended at OPS.
Kaiser himself is a product of OPS: Columbian Elementary, Beveridge Middle, Burke High.
He holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees in education from the University of Nebraska at Omaha.
He spent six years teaching in OPS, at Indian Hill Elementary in South Omaha.
That’s where he met a doctoral student from the University of Maryland.
Her name is Lauren.
He wound up following her back to Baltimore.
They’ve been married nearly 10 years.
The Kaisers have five children, including three they are caring for as foster parents.
Kaiser was surprised with his award on April 16.
There were balloons and TV cameras.
(In one TV shot, you can see Kaiser’s red and black Husker flag.)
He and his family were supposed to appear at City Hall for more ballyhoo on April 27.
That was the day Gray, the 25-year-old who died in police custody, was laid to rest.
That was the day rocks flew and buildings burned.
No one was thinking about awards, least of all Kaiser — who, on that afternoon, was racing across Baltimore to pick up several of his children.
What should have been a one-hour round-trip journey took nearly four times as long.
He tried not to worry as he saw cars on fire.
“It was a wild, surreal scene,” he said.
The next day they all stayed home as Baltimore scrambled to get under control.
And the following day, Mr. Kaiser walked into Room 103 and faced 29 seventh-graders.
Our city has been through a lot, he told them.
And I want to listen to what you have to say.
Mr. Kaiser then explained their task.
React to what has happened.
Speak from your heart.
But be sensitive to the feelings and experiences of others.
Don’t use blanket statements such as “all cops are.” Remember that your classmates have parents in law enforcement, city government or among the ranks of protesters.
They wrote.
And Mr. Kaiser posted their comments on his blog.
Most of them were furious at the rioters, whom they saw as opportunists exploiting a bad situation.
They were upset about how Baltimore was portrayed in the national media.
They said this wasn’t the full story.
They live in a beautiful and historic and, yes, troubled city.
But it’s their city.
Aya said rioters would make the problem worse.
Lucy said when you loot a store, you might as well just go into someone’s home and take their money.
Jawan said he could understand why people would riot but he doesn’t think it’s right.
Kamyne said this was “a very emotional and tough event for me to handle.”
“Mostly,” he said, “because I live three blocks away.”
Later, parent Andrea Better praised the teacher for encouraging the discussion.
Her son, Larry, is one of his students.
“Mr.
Kaiser gave them a voice,” she said.
“Allowing them to voice their opinions and have healthy discussions now builds self-confidence, self-awareness and compassion.”
Student Ericka Love, 13, said she likes Mr. Kaiser because he listens with an open mind.
“He always says there is more than one side of the story,” she said.
“Sometimes five sides of the story.”
Sophie Fireside, 13, said Mr. Kaiser knows “how to talk to students without freaking them out with huge words.
He knows how to make things really interesting.”
***
The curfew is over in Baltimore.
The soldiers have left.
Six police officers have been charged in conjunction with Gray’s death, which is now being called a murder.
And Baltimore’s Teacher of the Year is getting his due.
On Monday, Mr. Kaiser goes to City Hall for recognition.
On Wednesday, he throws out the first pitch at the Orioles game, in a stadium that won’t be empty.
The city’s problems are far from over.
But Kaiser hopes that the events of the past month will spark meaningful discussion and substantial change.
He is impressed by how his students handled their own reactions.
If middle-schoolers can find common ground on difficult issues, he thinks, perhaps so can adults.
“I told them ‘Maybe you guys are going to be the leaders of how we talk to each other,’” he says.
“You can role-model for the country.”