ARTICLE
Imm-33633
PRIMARY
Innovative Immigrants
Boston
SOME 70 million immigrants have come to America since the first colonists arrived.
The role their labor has played in economic development is widely understood.
Much less familiar is the extent to which their remarkable innovations have driven American prosperity.
Indeed, while both Barack Obama and Mitt Romney have lauded entrepreneurship, innovation and ''job creation,'' neither candidate has made comprehensive immigration reform an issue, despite immigrants' crucial role in those fields.
Yet understanding how immigrants have fueled innovation through history is critical to making sure they continue to drive prosperity in the future.
At the country's beginning, the three most important architects of its financial system were immigrants: Alexander Hamilton, from St. Croix, then part of the Danish West Indies; Robert Morris, born in Liverpool, England; and Albert Gallatin of Geneva.
Morris was superintendent of finance during the Revolutionary War, using every resource at his command to support the army in the field.
Hamilton, as the first secretary of the Treasury, rescued the country from bankruptcy and designed its basic financial system.
Gallatin paid down much of the national debt, engineered the financing of the Louisiana Purchase and remains the longest-serving Treasury secretary ever.
Immigrants' financial innovations continued through the 19th century.
In 1808 Alexander Brown, from Ireland, founded the nation's first investment bank, and his immigrant sons set up Brown Brothers.
The Lehman brothers, from Germany, began as dry-goods merchants and cotton brokers in Alabama, then moved to New York just before the Civil War and eventually founded a bank.
Many other immigrants, including Marcus Goldman of Goldman Sachs, followed similar paths, starting very small, traveling to new cities and establishing banks.
Meanwhile, ''Yankee'' firms like Kidder, Peabody and Drexel, Morgan -- whose partners were native-born -- remained less mobile, tied by family and high society to Boston and New York.