ARTICLE
What's happening?
Violent protests have shaken the streets of Baltimore following the April 19 death of Freddie Gray, a 25-year-old black man.
Police arrested Gray on April 12 after he ran from them and was found in possession of a knife.
Though police officials reported he was arrested without incident, Gray sustained serious injuries--including a fractured spinal cord--that required surgery and eventually led to his death.
In the aftermath, peaceful protests began in Baltimore but quickly turned violent, with protesters looting stores, wrecking police cars and throwing bricks at law enforcement.
Maryland Governor Larry Hogan declared a state of emergency on April 27, activating the National Guard to control the chaos in Baltimore.
Why is it happening?
Witness accounts of Gray's arrest and the narrative explained by the Baltimore state's attorney don't match up with police reports.
Though the police union claims that Gray's injuries weren't caused by the arresting officers, the coroner ruled Gray's death a homicide.
It's Baltimore Police Department policy to buckle prisoners into their seats, but Gray's seatbelt was never fastened following his arrest.
One witness reported that police officers bent Gray's legs and put a knee on his neck to restrain him during arrest, and another released a video showing him crying out in pain.
Reports also indicate that Gray's multiple requests for medical attention were refused during his transport.
Police officials still haven't offered a plausible explanation for how Gray broke his spine.
Why should I care?
Some have suggested that the protests in Baltimore are largely a continuation of the protests that have rocked the U.S. since the death of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., last summer.
Indeed, protests in Baltimore and across the country have continued under the mantra "Black Lives Matter."
Gray's death follows those of Eric Garner, Tamir Rice, Brown and others as examples of black men dying at the hands of police officers in just the last year.
According to The Atlantic's Ta-nehisi Coates, a Baltimore native, this crisis has been decades in the making, reinforced by systemic poverty and economic depression.
As one of the country's oldest major metropolitan hubs, Baltimore is representative of how fragile trust is between police and minorities.
Race relations and police brutality will continue to be at the forefront of national conversation, and calls for reform will affect everything from local government to the upcoming presidential elections.
What's next?
On May 1, Baltimore State's Attorney Marilyn Mosby charged the six police officers involved in Gray's arrest with felonies ranging from assault to murder.
The police union has requested that Mosby recuse herself because of personal connections, but she has responded that the case doesn't pose any conflicts for her.
Earlier this week, Baltimore lifted the 10 p.m. to 5 a.m. curfew that was instated April 27, and the National Guard withdrew from the city.
Since April 23, at least 486 arrests were made in Baltimore and 113 police officers were injured during the protests, according to CNN.
Close to home, hundreds gathered outside the Chicago Police Department on April 28 to peacefully protest Gray's death.
Chicago remains one of the most segregated cities in the U.S., and some have suggested that tension must be addressed before it reaches a similar boiling point.
Timeline
April 12
8:40 a.m. - Police arrest Freddie Gray after he runs from them in Baltimore.
Police report he requests an inhaler, claiming he can't breathe.
Officers put Gray into a van without a seatbelt.
8:46 a.m. - Police stop the van and Gray is placed in leg irons and returned to the wagon.
9:26 a.m. - Upon arriving at the police station, Gray is in critical condition and sent to University of Maryland Shock Trauma Center where he later undergoes surgery.
April 18
First protests begin in Baltimore.
Demonstrators stand in front of Western District police station with their backs to the police.
April 19
Gray is pronounced dead after one week in the hospital.
April 20
Baltimore officials announce that six policemen involved in Gray's arrest are suspended.
April 21
The U.S. Justice Department announces a federal investigation of Gray's death.
April 25
Hundreds gather for a protest and march toward Baltimore City Hall.
Several are arrested when the protest turns violent.
April 27
Following Gray's funeral, Baltimore explodes with violent unrest.
A citywide curfew is announced from 10 p.m. to 5 a.m.
May 1
State's Attorney Marilyn Mosby charges the six Baltimore police officials involved in Gray's death with various counts, including second-degree murder, manslaughter, assault and misconduct in the office.
May 3
Baltimore's curfew is rescinded and the National Guard withdraws from the city.
Quotes
"It is very clear that there's a difference between what we saw last week between the peaceful protests ... and the thugs, who only want to incite violence and destroy our city."
--BALTIMORE MAYOR STEPHANIE RAWLINGS-BLAKE, WHO CAUGHT FLAK FOR USING THE WORD "THUGS" TO DESCRIBE PROTESTERS
"People want justice.
They want the officers to go to jail.
But most of all, they want reform--sweeping reform."
--ADAM JORDAN, A BALTIMORE PROTESTER TO THE WASHINGTON POST
"To the youth of the city: I will seek justice on your behalf.
This is a moment.
This is your moment.
Let's ensure we have peaceful and productive rallies that will develop structural and systemic changes ... as young people, our time is now."
--MARILYN MOSBY, BALTIMORE STATE'S ATTORNEY