ARTICLE
Thousands of police from around the country spilled out of a church into the streets surrounding a slain New York City officer’s funeral on Friday, calling for respect and understanding at a time when law enforcement is being deeply scrutinized.
Busloads of officers arrived from as far as California, Louisiana and Chicago for Officer Brian Moore’s funeral on Long Island.
As a hearse carried his coffin to the cemetery, they lined up 10 and 20 deep to salute him.
“Brian’s death comes at a time of great challenge” for officers nationwide, who are “increasingly bearing the brunt of loud criticism,” Police Commissioner William Bratton said.
Only five months earlier, the New York Police Department mourned two other officers who were killed in an ambush by a gunman who said he wanted revenge for police killings of civilians.
“What is lost in the shouting and the rhetoric is the context of what we do,” said Bratton, his voice cracking as he posthumously promoted Moore, 25, to the rank of detective.
“What is lost is the way we already work together, the ways we get it right.
... What is lost is that public safety is a shared responsibility.”
Moore died Monday, two days after he was shot in Queens.
He and his partner were in street clothes in an unmarked car and were stopping a man suspected of carrying a handgun when the suspect shot him in the head.
Moore’s death came amid a national debate about policing, race and deadly force following the recent killings of unarmed black men by officers in New York; Ferguson; and North Charleston, S.C., and the suspicious death of Freddie Gray after police detained him in Baltimore.
In December, New York City Officers Rafael Ramos and Wenjian Liu were killed in their patrol car.
The man who gunned them down had boasted online that he would kill police in revenge for the chokehold death of Eric Garner on Staten Island and the shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson.
Liu’s relatives were among the mourners at Moore’s funeral, which was guarded by snipers on the roof of a nearby elementary school as a police helicopter hovered in the three-mile no-fly zone authorities imposed overhead.
Moore was the son, nephew and cousin of NYPD officers, and two other cousins serve in Long Island.
Moore was so determined to follow them that he took the police entrance exam at 17 and “devoted his whole being to the job,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said.
The suspect in Moore’s killing, Demetrius Blackwell, faces charges including murder, attempted murder and other crimes.
He is being held without bail and has not entered a plea.
His attorney has denied the charges.
INQUIRY IN BALTIMORE
The Justice Department waded anew Friday into fraught police-community relations, with new Attorney General Loretta Lynch declaring the subject “one of the most challenging issues of our time.” She announced a wide-ranging investigation into Baltimore’s police.
The federal civil rights investigation, which city officials requested following the death last month of a man in police custody, will search for discriminatory policing practices and examine allegations that Baltimore officers too often use excessive force and make unconstitutional searches and arrests.
The investigation is to build upon the government’s voluntary and collaborative review of the Baltimore police that began last year.
Since then, the death of Gray, 25, and the days of rioting and protests that followed exposed a “serious erosion of public trust,” Lynch said.
The announcement indicated that Lynch, who was sworn in recently as the successor to Eric Holder, is likely to keep the Justice Department engaged in a national dialogue about race relations and law enforcement.
The federal department has undertaken dozens of other city police investigations, including more than 20 during Holder’s tenure.
If it finds systemic civil rights violations, the investigations typically result in court-enforceable agreements between the federal government and the local community that serve as blueprints for change and are overseen by an independent monitor.