ARTICLE
With racial tension gripping Baltimore's streets for weeks now, Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake on Wednesday asked the Justice Department to investigate the city's entire Police Department, while at the same time promising that officers would be wearing body cameras by the end of the year.
"Baltimore continues to have a fractured relationship between the police and the community," she said.
"We have to get it right.
Failure is not an option."
She said her aim is to ensure the department is not engaging in "a pattern of stops, searches or arrests that violate the Fourth Amendment."
Shortly afterward, Maryland Gov.
Larry Hogan lifted the state of emergency he had declared on April 27, praising the National Guard and the police officers who "quickly brought calm and order back to the city."
"We touched every corner of the city we could reach," he said.
"We saw devastation and destruction, but we also saw incredible acts of kindness.
We saw neighbors helping neighbors.
We saw a community that cares about each other."
The request for Justice Department help comes one day after a visit by U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch, who pledged to improve the Baltimore Police Department.
Lynch met with members of Freddie Gray's family, community and civic leaders, including Rawlings-Blake, as well as police.
Gray, 25 and black, was arrested April 12 and had been carrying an illegal knife, police said.
He was handcuffed and put inside a police van that was to deliver him to precinct headquarters.
During one of several stops he was also put in leg irons but arrived at the precinct unconscious and, it was later determined, suffering a severe spinal injury.
He died one week later, setting off rioting and days of tense standoffs between protesters and police.
Police cars and businesses were set ablaze as hundreds of demonstrators threw rocks and looted stores.
At least 486 people were arrested and 113 police officers were injured in the protests, police said.
Rawlings-Blake came under fire at times and was accused of responding too slowly to Gray's death.
The Justice Department, which last month launched a criminal investigation into whether Gray's civil rights were violated, said it is weighing the mayor's request for a "pattern or practice" investigation that would determine whether the department is systematically violating people's rights.
"The Attorney General is actively considering that option in light of what she heard from law enforcement, city officials, and community, faith and youth leaders in Baltimore yesterday," Justice Department spokeswoman Dena Iverson said in a statement.
It is not the first time Baltimore has sought out the Justice Department.
Last October, the city asked for -- and received -- Justice Department help to look into allegations of police misconduct, a long-simmering issue that became more urgent after a Tribune Newspapers series found the city had paid nearly $6 million since 2011 in court judgments and settlements for lawsuits in which officers were accused of using unnecessary force.
The federal investigation Rawlings-Blake called for Wednesday is more extensive than last year's review, said Kevin Harris, a spokesman for the mayor's office, adding that the mayor's request involves a broader range of systemic issues.
Last week, Baltimore State's Attorney Marilyn Mosby filed criminal charges against the six officers involved in Gray's arrest and transport.
The six, who face charges ranging from assault to second-degree murder, are currently free on bail.
Mosby has said the officers did not have probable cause to arrest Gray because the knife tucked into his clothing was a legal pocketknife -- not an illegal one, such as a spring-loaded device, as indicated in the police report.
An attorney for one of the arrested officers has challenged Mosby's claims.
Marc Zayon, who is representing Officer Edward Nero, 29, asked the court to make the prosecutor's office and the police turn over the knife for inspection, according to a motion filed Monday.
Nero was one of the officers who placed Gray in the transport van and later placed him in leg irons.
Nero faces two counts of second-degree assault, two counts of misconduct in office and one charge of false imprisonment.