ARTICLE
Funny how other people see you, especially compared with how you see yourself.
When I tilt my mirror in almost any direction, I see that I still look 20 years younger than 57.
Not bad, considering that my friends from high school and college have aged in horrible ways.
Bringing this to my mind was a recent article in which the Post-Dispatch announced there would be changes to the Sunday edition.
What this means for yours truly — my most vital concern when it comes to changes at the newspaper — is that I will write a “Spotlight” column that will look at people, places and things that are uniquely St. Louis.
If you have some ideas, by the way, send them my way.
This all prompted a reader to wonder if assigning me a new Sunday duty was designed to remove this Life Sherpa column from the starting rotation.
I know, the bullet you don’t hear is the one that gets you, but I plan to keep making paragraphs.
The reader also said, “I hope that your bad boy, sensible, conservative-leaning thoughts have not been ‘eliminated’ ...”
Now there’s a description I can live with, mainly because it doesn’t contain any really negative qualities.
I like the notion of “bad boy.” It has a playfulness to it, and it’s a damn sight better than “mean” or “evil.” I’m flattered by “sensible.” We all like to think we make sense, especially in times seemingly devoid of the common variety.
“Conservative leaning” is my favorite, because it skillfully infers a nuance often missing from modern pigeon-holing, which deals only with “this” or “that.” The term recognizes feet planted in liberal soil, the son of two blue-collar, union-supporting FDR Democrats.
Even now, I get accused of being a liberal.
When I talk about gay marriage and drug legalization, or the domestic use of drones and corporate bail-outs, I am labeled a liberal.
Just a few weeks ago, I was called a liberal in connection with the notion of removing a monument to Confederate soldiers from Forest Park.
The real problem, I opined, was in those years following the Civil War, when Confederate memorials were allowed to be installed in the first place.
My conservatism leans away from dedicating monuments to those who declared war on the U.S.
Finally, the fact that I work for this newspaper makes me an all-but-convicted liberal.
Heck, I even voted for Jesse Jackson for president in 1984.
Then Jackson called New York “Hymie Town” and I considered for the first time that liberal politicians, not just Republicans such as Richard Nixon, could lie to us.
That might have been the first time I specifically recall a conservative lean.
And I’ve leaned harder in the following 30 years.
Much of that has been caused by liberals rambling on about how much more needs to be done, all the while blithely ignoring the damage done by what they have already been doing.
Some of it has been caused by a genuine confusion about some issues, such as #blacklivesmatter, which is evolving into pointedly the type of liberalism that Saul Bellow criticized as being “medallion-wearing and placard bearing.”
Of course they matter, in the sense that all lives matter.
But clearly, the slogan aims to allege that some (Many, few?
Police, whites?)
think they don’t.
Some celebrated that charging six police officers in the death of Freddie Gray in Baltimore helps show that life mattered.
But what about the innocent life of 6-year-old Marcus Johnson Jr., a St. Louis child killed seven weeks ago (at the time of this writing).
Someone fatally shot this little guy during a rolling gun battle in broad daylight while he was riding in a van with his family in O’Fallon Park.
The case remains unsolved, and largely undiscussed.
Is it conservative-leaning to wonder how it is we can remember a slogan more than we can a dead kindergartner?