ARTICLE
The city of Cleveland has reached a settlement with the Justice Department over what federal authorities said was a pattern of unconstitutional policing and excessive use of force, people briefed on the case said Monday.
The settlement, which could be announced as early as Tuesday, comes days after a judge declared a Cleveland police officer not guilty of manslaughter for climbing onto the hood of a car and firing repeatedly - part of a 137-shot barrage - at its unarmed occupants, both of them black.
The verdict prompted hours of protests and reignited discussions about how police officers treat the city's African-American residents.
Similar negotiations
For Cleveland, a settlement avoids a long and costly court fight and the appearance that city leaders are resisting change.
Mayor Frank Jackson faces a recall petition from city activists who say, among other grievances, that he has not done enough to prevent police abuses.
The Justice Department has called him a full partner in its effort to improve the police department.
The details of the settlement were not immediately clear, but in similar negotiations in recent years, the Justice Department has insisted that cities allow independent monitors to oversee changes inside police departments.
A spokeswoman for the Cleveland Division of Police referred questions to the mayor's office, which said it would not comment Monday.
A spokeswoman for the Justice Department also had no comment.
Patterns in policing
The Justice Department has opened nearly two dozen investigations into police departments during the Obama administration.
Federal investigators found patterns of unconstitutional policing in cities including Seattle; Newark, New Jersey; Albuquerque, N.M.; and Ferguson, Mo.
Federal authorities recently announced they would investigate the police department in Baltimore following the death of Freddie Gray, a 25-year-old black man who died of injuries he suffered while in police custody.
The Justice Department's report on the Cleveland Division of Police was among its most scathing.
Investigators said in December that police officers unnecessarily used deadly force; used excessive force against mentally ill people; and inappropriately used stun guns, chemical sprays and punches.
The report highlighted one case in which officers kicked an African-American man in the head while he was handcuffed and on the ground, then did not report using force in the arrest.
The report was too late to cover the death of 12-year-old Tamir Rice, who was playing with a replica gun last November when police shot him.