ARTICLE
Here’s an awkward question for a liberal to ask: If Baltimore has a black mayor, a black police chief, and many black elected representatives, how come its black residents are still doing so poorly?
In Ferguson, Mo., it was easy to understand how an overwhelmingly white city government could fail its newly minted black majority.
The solution seemed simple: Vote in a more representative government.
That’s exactly what activists in Ferguson have just done.
But Baltimore reminds us that voting is no panacea for poverty.
Baltimore has elected black mayors since the 1980s, yet prospects for the city’s poor black youth haven’t improved.
Darnell Washington, a black resident of Baltimore who says he spent nine years in prison for a drug crime he did not commit, doesn’t think the city’s black politicians care about people like him.
“Just because they have black skin doesn’t mean they are black on the inside,” said Washington, as tourists snapped selfies in front of the CVS that was looted following Freddie Gray’s funeral.
Graffiti on its wall expressed his cynicism: “Our city and state leaders are not for our kids’ lives.” 
Maybe part of what we glimpsed during the recent riots was resentment of the black underclass against the black elite, which once lived cheek to jowl with them in the very neighborhood that went up in flames.
During segregation, Pennsylvania Avenue in West Baltimore teemed with money, opportunity, and education.
Thurgood Marshall grew up here.
Billie Holiday sang here, at the Royal Theater.
Harry O. Wilson founded the city’s first black bank and became one of Baltimore’s richest men.
But the Civil Rights movement gave affluent blacks the chance to slip away to the suburbs — white flight in another hue.
Between 1970 and 1995, seven million blacks across America escaped inner cities — an exodus nearly double the size of the Great Migration of blacks out of the South decades prior, according to Sheryll Cashin, a Georgetown law professor.
Maryland, home of the largest free black population during slavery, now hosts five of the nation’s top 10 wealthiest black suburbs.
Meanwhile, the poor blacks left behind in places like West Baltimore are in many ways more economically and socially isolated than their counterparts were a century ago.
That’s the fallacy of the slogan “black lives matter.” We know Obama’s life matters.
We know Baltimore mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake’s life matters.
We know Oprah’s life matters.
It’s the lives of the poor that we forget — until they riot.
Poor whites have been largely forgotten too.
A team of researchers who tracked 780 first-graders in Baltimore for three decades found that only 4 percent of poor kids of either race managed to get a college degree, compared with 45 percent of those from the middle class.
Both blacks and whites in this cohort — who were almost the same age as Freddie Gray — had alarmingly high rates of criminal conviction: 41 percent of poor white men and 49 percent of poor black men.
In fact, white men in the study — both middle-class and poor — reported higher rates of heavy drug use, recreational drug use, and binge drinking than blacks.
Nonetheless, white boys grew up to earn incomes that were almost double that of their black counterparts.
Their criminal records did not impede them from getting relatively high-wage jobs in construction through family and friends.
Indeed, by age 22, 79 percent of low-income white men were working, compared with only 59percent of low-income black men.
Therein lies a problem politicians can’t fix: Even the poorest whites have a historic advantage in the competition over dwindling blue collar jobs.
And all the political clout in the city couldn’t keep Bethlehem Steel from closing.
When politics fails, there’s always God.
Baltimore has twice as many churches as Boston.
Last Sunday, thousands flocked to the Empowerment Temple to hear Dr. Jamal H. Bryant preach.
On Mother’s Day, Bryant prayed for Freddie Gray’s mom.
He asked all the women in the room who’d buried their children to come to the altar.
A dozen women stepped forward.
Then he asked all the full-time single dads to stand.
Eleven men stood.
“Supernatural opportunities are going to open up for your children,” Bryant declared from the pulpit.
“Generational curses are being lifted.
Your children will not become addicts.
.
.
.
Your children will not be statistics.”
He sounded like a candidate running for office, making promises that are impossible to keep.