ARTICLE
Less than two weeks after six police officers were charged in the arrest and death of Freddie Gray, the officers' lawyers and supporters have sketched the outline of a defense, taking aim at the substance of some of the most serious accusations, as well as at procedural issues.
Last Friday, lawyers for the six officers filed motions to dismiss all charges and asserted that Marilyn J. Mosby, the state's attorney for Baltimore City, was so tainted by conflicts of interest that she could not have fairly judged the merits of the case.
They also argued that she misread the law in charging that Mr. Gray's arrest for carrying an illegal knife -- the reason for detaining him in a police van where he suffered a fatal spinal cord injury -- was without foundation.
Those are threads in a broader narrative that is expected to challenge Ms. Mosby's main accusation, laid out in her charging documents.
She says the officers illegally arrested and shackled Mr. Gray, flouting police rules and standards of decency in loading him into a police van without required safety restraints and ignoring his pleas for help during an extended ride.
Mr. Gray suffered a fall or other accident during the ride, Ms. Mosby said, which led to his death on April 19.
She charged one officer with second-degree murder and manslaughter, three more with manslaughter, and two others with assault and false imprisonment.
The officers, who have been suspended, are free on bail; a grand jury is expected to consider soon whether to indict them on the charges.
In interviews, lawyers for some officers and others familiar with the defense strategy paint a vastly different picture of what happened to Mr. Gray, who was 25 when he died.
The officers, they say, were acting by the book, and they had no cause to believe the arrest would cost Mr. Gray his life.
Under that explanation, Mr. Gray was treated no differently from thousands of other people who have been arrested or detained.
His death, the lawyers argue, was not the result of police brutality or even indifference to his safety -- even though they did not buckle him into a seatbelt -- but of a tragic accident.
Although an autopsy found bruises and other marks consistent with a fall that could have caused Mr. Gray's spinal cord injury, according to one person with knowledge of the investigation, there was no indication that he had been beaten or otherwise mistreated.
That person said that without a cellphone video of Mr. Gray's arrest, which shows him turning his neck and apparently supporting his weight while standing outside the back of the van, it would have been virtually impossible to determine that his fatal neck injury occurred in the van.
''Police officers would say they are just doing what they are being told to do in a city with a long history of crime problems,'' said Sgt.
Robert F. Cherry, a 21-year veteran officer and the former president of the Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 3, which represents Baltimore police officers.
''These officers definitely did not do anything wrong criminally.''
How that account would fare in a courtroom is impossible to say.
Ms. Mosby's evidence of police misconduct is unlikely to become public until trials begin.
But at trial, prosecutors will need to show beyond a reasonable doubt that the officers were responsible for Mr. Gray's death.
That may not be easy, given the uncertainty surrounding how and when Mr. Gray was fatally injured, and that most officers were present only sporadically during his time in custody.
Two defense lawyers said Ms. Mosby might be seeking to build her case around unreleased statements that five of the six officers voluntarily gave investigators.
But legal considerations, including the Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination, could make the statements inadmissible in court.
Beyond those complications, the officers' lawyers are likely to seek to move the trials outside Baltimore, which was shaken by riots and placed under a curfew after Mr. Gray's death.
Another location is more likely to field a jury more sympathetic to the police.
Ms. Mosby has not disclosed details of the case since announcing the charges on May 1, saying she will not ''litigate this case through the media.''
But experts in criminal law say the charges speak volumes by themselves, suggesting that she believes the first contact between Mr. Gray and the arresting officer was improper and led to the fatal chain of events.
''I think they reflect her view that there was nothing about this situation, from the initial engagement to the final admitting of Mr. Gray to Shock Trauma'' at a nearby hospital ''that she regarded as an appropriate use of police powers,'' said David Gray, a professor at the University of Maryland School of Law in Baltimore, who is not related to Mr. Gray.
''I can't imagine a stronger condemnation.''
Still, some criminal defense lawyers say Ms. Mosby's case may be too hastily prepared, and her charges too ambitious, to weather a trial.
Ms. Mosby reserved the most serious charges for Officer Caesar R. Goodson Jr., who drove the van in which Mr. Gray was fatally injured: second-degree murder, two counts of manslaughter by vehicle, assault and official misconduct for failing to secure Mr. Gray or summon medical help.
Taken together, experts say, the murder and vehicular manslaughter charges suggest that Ms. Mosby believes Mr. Gray's fatal injury was caused by a ''rough ride'' -- a deliberately turbulent trip in the police van, perhaps as punishment.
The second-degree murder charge effectively accuses Officer Goodson of being wantonly reckless in his treatment of Mr. Gray, knowing that he could die, but proceeding anyway.
In charging three other officers with manslaughter, Ms. Mosby appears to have concluded that they knew Mr. Gray was at risk of dying, yet they failed to properly secure him inside the van and later failed to seek medical aid.
Mr. Gray ''began to flail his legs and scream'' after he was detained, Ms. Mosby said, and Officer Goodson and three other officers later restrained him in ankle shackles and adjustable plastic handcuffs.
They then placed him facedown in the vehicle's rear, she said while announcing the charges.
Despite checking on Mr. Gray three times during his transport, the officers never secured him with ''the provided seatbelt or restraining device'' as Baltimore Police Department regulations require, she said.
The officers' supporters say, however, that the seatbelt regulation was issued on April 3, nine days before Mr. Gray's arrest, and buried within 15 pages of revisions to the department's general order on handling people in custody.
Before those changes, officers followed a general order dating to at least 1997 that recommended securing detainees during transport but that left the decision to individual officers.
Whether the officers had read or been briefed by superiors on the changes is unknown.
In the past, officers sometimes skipped putting a seatbelt on detainees in the vans out of fear for their own safety.
''In the vans we have been provided with, it is difficult to seatbelt a prisoner without the officer being at risk of getting assaulted, spit on, bitten or kicked,'' Sergeant Cherry said.
But in this case, that argument could seem strained; not only was Mr. Gray shackled, but one officer entered the van during its second stop to lift him onto a bench.
The defense faces other potential hurdles.
The 1997 general order requires officers to seek medical treatment for detainees ''when necessary,'' but the April 3 revisions go further, requiring treatment ''when requested.''
Ms. Mosby said the officers ignored Mr. Gray's repeated complaints of breathing problems and requests for a doctor.
During the van's next-to-last stop, she said, three officers who checked on him did not summon help even though he was ''unresponsive on the floor.''
Not until officers tried to remove Mr. Gray from the van at the police station did they realize he had stopped breathing and called an ambulance, she said.
Another charge -- that officers illegally arrested and falsely imprisoned Mr. Gray -- is less serious.
There, too, the officers' supporters see those events differently.
Officers arrested Mr. Gray after finding what they judged to be an illegal knife in his pocket.
Ms. Mosby said the knife, which the arresting officers described as ''spring assisted, one hand operated,'' is legal under Maryland law.
But in court documents, lawyers for one officer said the knife was illegal under Baltimore law, which bans ''any knife with an automatic spring or other device for opening and/or closing the blade.''
That has prompted debates among lawyers and even knife aficionados over such issues as the difference between ''spring assisted'' and ''automatic spring,'' and whether the knife fits the definition of a switchblade, which is illegal under both city and state laws.
The confusion itself could be the charge's undoing.
Last year, the Supreme Court ruled that a police search could be legal, even if it was premised on a mistake.
What counted, the court said, was whether the officer's mistake was reasonable.
''Maybe as an objective interpretation of Maryland and Baltimore law, the knife was perfectly legal,'' Professor Gray said.
''But it may well have been reasonable to believe that possession of that knife was not legal.''
The charges of false imprisonment are especially surprising to some experts because they suggest that ordinary police officers can be charged with a crime merely for making a mistake during an arrest.
''Their job is, if they have reasonable suspicion that someone is doing something wrong, then they can stop them,'' said John Francomano, a criminal defense lawyer who previously served in the Baltimore County state attorney's office.
Yet powerful evidence exists that many wrongful arrests in poor Baltimore neighborhoods are deliberate, not honest mistakes.
In 2005, according to a class-action lawsuit against the department, police officers arrested 76,497 citizens without warrants -- mostly for crimes like loitering, disorderly conduct or disturbing the peace.
Prosecutors threw out more than 25,000 of those charges as legally unjustified.
The department settled the suit in 2010, agreeing to change policies that encouraged false arrests.
But in April 2012, the American Civil Liberties Union said little had changed.