ARTICLE
Martin O’Malley launched his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination Saturday in the heart of the city he once led.
But Baltimore today confronts an image far different from the one O’Malley left behind when his term as mayor ended eight years ago.
The city has been rocked by killings and riots and has become a national symbol of urban turmoil and despair.
O’Malley, 52, confronted the controversy Saturday as he has since parts of West Baltimore erupted in protest last month over the death of Freddie Gray, an African-American man who died in police custody.
Critics charged that his anti-crime policies alienated that constituency.
O’Malley vigorously disagreed, and spent much of his speech Saturday addressing the concerns.
“For all of us who have given so much of our energies to making our city a safer, fairer, more just and more prosperous place, it was a heartbreaking night in the life of our city,” he said.
“But there is something to be learned from that night, and there is something to be offered to our country from those flames.”
Baltimore’s agony, O’Malley told an audience of about 600, was “not only about race; not only about policing in America.
It’s about everything it is supposed to mean to be an American.”
He talked about income inequality, poverty and how too many people have too little hope.
He said he would be their champion, beholden not to Wall Street but to working-class people.
“Tell me how it is you can get pulled over for a broken taillight in our country, but if you wreck the nation’s economy you are untouchable,” he said.
O’Malley remains a longshot, barely visible in Democratic presidential polls behind front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton, and he does not appear to have the passionate liberal following of Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont.
O’Malley devoted much of his speech to his record as mayor of Baltimore and governor of Maryland, but took one swipe at Clinton.
“The presidency is not a crown to be passed back and forth between two royal families,” he said, also a reference to former Florida Gov.
Jeb Bush, who is expected to seek the Republican nomination.