ARTICLE
A December review of policing in Cleveland found that the use of unreasonable force was part of a pattern of behavior.
The Justice Department and the city of Cleveland announced an agreement Tuesday that would place the troubled local police department under the direction of an independent monitor to ensure reforms following a string of deadly encounters involving officers.
The agreement comes following the weekend acquittal of an officer in the 2012 fatal shooting of two unarmed residents, which prompted a wave of protests in the city, and the November shooting of a 12-year-old boy who was killed while playing with a toy gun in a local park.
Mayor Frank Jackson described the settlement as "a defining moment" for the city, adding that he hoped it would serve as a "catalyst" for broad reforms in the police department's relationship with a wary community.
Vanita Gupta, who directs Justice's Civil Rights Division, said the 105-page agreement outlined needed improvement in virtually every aspect of the policing operation, from how Cleveland recruits its officers and how they are trained to the way it disciplines those officers who break the rules.
A centerpiece of the federally monitored program is the creation of a community police commission composed of local civil rights advocates, business leaders, police union representatives and others to address such concerns as racial bias and whether officers are being held accountable for their actions.
A December Justice review of policing in Cleveland found that the use of unreasonable force was part of a pattern of behavior among police that was in some cases endorsed by supervisors.
The Justice report mirrored recent findings in other cities, including Ferguson, Mo., and Albuquerque, N.M., that have contributed to a national re-examination of policing in the nation.
Justice officials have reviewed the operations of more than 20 departments since 2009.
Earlier this month, Justice launched a review of the Baltimore Police Department following last month's death of Freddie Gray.
The 25-year-old man suffered severe spinal cord injuries and died while in police custody, touching off violent protests in that city.
Six officers have been charged by state authorities in connection to Gray's arrest and death.
"Constitutional policing is key to building trust between police departments and the communities they serve," Gupta said, appearing with Jackson to outline the agreement.
"As you know, the difficult task of rebuilding trust between police and the community is one that communities around the country are struggling with, and it is also one that is not new."
The Justice review of the Cleveland agency examined 600 incidents in which police used some method of force between 2010 and 2013.
Police shootings
A December review of policing in Cleveland found that the use of unreasonable force was part of a pattern of behavior.