ARTICLE
The Justice Department will investigate whether the Baltimore Police Department engaged in a pattern of unconstitutional policing, law enforcement officials said on Thursday, a day after the mayor asked for an inquiry.
The request by Mayor Stephanie Rawlings-Blake came days after the state's attorney for Baltimore filed criminal charges against six officers involved in the arrest of Freddie Gray, who died April 19 after being injured while in police custody, setting off large demonstrations, arson and looting.
At a policing conference earlier on Thursday, the Baltimore police commissioner, Anthony W. Batts, said he did not object to an outside investigation, adding that he was committed to reforming the Police Department.
"I am willing to do anything it takes to win that trust back," he said.
"If it's DOJ, whatever it takes."
The unrest in Baltimore last week, and the tensions it exposed between the police and community, present the first major test of Lynch's tenure.
She was sworn in last week as the successor to Eric Holder, whose final year as attorney general was consumed by matters of race relations and law enforcement.
Rawlings-Blake initially appeared determined to fix the department's problems herself, but later said she would accept outside help to repair a breakdown in public trust in a city rocked by riots sparked by Gray's death.
Lynch, who visited the city earlier this week, said Baltimore had made significant strides in a voluntary, collaborative reform effort with the Justice Department that began last fall.
But, appearing before members of Congress on Thursday, she said, "I have not ruled out the possibility that more may need to be done."
The civil rights investigation, similar to ones undertaken in cities including Ferguson, Mo., and Cleveland, will examine the policing patterns and practices of the entire police department.
It is far broader in scope than a separate Justice Department investigation that aims to determine whether Gray's civil rights were violated.
Baltimore suffered days of unrest after Gray died April 19 after a week in a coma.
Protesters threw bottles and bricks at police the night of his funeral on April 27, injuring nearly 100 officers.