ARTICLE
The Chicago City Council on Wednesday approved $5.5 million in reparations for victims of infamous former Chicago police commander Jon Burge and his "midnight crew" who used electric shock, suffocation and even Russian roulette to coerce confessions from dozens of black suspects, special Cook County prosecutors concluded after a four-year investigation.
The city also formally apologized for one of the most notorious eras in its history.
The measure comes at a time when a spotlight has been cast on police departments nationwide after a series of officers have shot and killed unarmed African-American men.
Here's what you need to know about the ordinance, which is believed to be the first of its kind in the country.
>> From 1972 to 1991, Burge and his subordinates allegedly tortured suspects to confess to crimes.
The "allegedly" is important because Burge never has been convicted of anything but perjury and obstruction of justice for denying any knowledge of the torture.
He was sentenced to four-and-a-half years in prison for lying about the torture and recently was released.
He still collects a police pension.
>> As many as 100 people may have been torture victims.
Under the measure approved Wednesday, more than 50 victims likely will be eligible for payouts of up to $100,000 each, according to the city.
Neither relatives of deceased victims nor victims who already received settlement money of more than $100,000 are eligible for the city money.
Chicago and Cook County together already have paid out about $100 million in costs related to Burge torture cases.
>> To some victims, the money is secondary to the sense of closure they have found after the city's formal apology.
"I'm just glad somebody believed me after all these years," said Will Porch, 60.
Porch said that in 1979, Burge and those under his command beat Porch into confessing to robbery and attempted murder that he did not commit.
Porch spent more than 14 years in prison.
"It's not your dream come true, but it's something," said Porch, who lives in North Chicago.
"After all these years with nothing, we got something."
>> The City Council also approved plans to create a memorial to torture victims and to require the Burge case to be taught in 8th and 10th grades at Chicago Public Schools.
Other city benefits may include job placement services, free City Colleges tuition and access to counseling services for eligible victims and their families.
>> The reparations ordinance comes at a particularly tense time in police-community relations across the country.
The death of unarmed black teenager Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., last year shone a nationwide spotlight on incidences of police killing.
Just last month, a Chicago police officer was acquitted on a legal technicality of manslaughter charges in the killing of an unarmed 22-year-old.
More recently, six Baltimore police officers were charged in connection with the death of Freddie Gray after days of protests that sometimes turned violent.
Advocates hope Chicago's reparations fund could become a model for other cities with histories of police misconduct.