ARTICLE
With many in the country still reeling from the unrest in Baltimore, Terence Blanchard’s poetic performance Thursday at the Holland Performing Arts Center provided a way to reflect on those events through jazz that traversed a wide spectrum of styles, even if the impetus behind the performance wasn’t obvious.
The legendary New Orleans trumpeter is releasing “Breathless,” a statement piece that takes its name from Eric Garner’s now famous last words.
And his new album’s release, which takes place on May 26, serves as a commentary on systemic racial discrimination.
This is the second time he’s released an album along these lines.
In 2007 he won a Grammy for “A Tale of God’s Will (A Requiem for Katrina),” which was in response to the devastation the hurricane left behind in New Orleans in 2005.
Blanchard is also using his tour to introduce his new quintet, the E-Collective, which features bassist Donald Ramsey, drummer Oscar Seaton, guitarist Charles Altura and keyboardist Fabian Almazan.
They were a formidable combination of talents, and they backed up Blanchard’s brassy acrobatics with music that was threaded through with funk, fusion and blues as well as a smattering of soul and the barest hint of rock.
The evening unfolded as an extended, evocative jam session and highlighted how Blanchard gives other musicians the kind of freedom that results in a transformative collaboration.
Each musician had his extended moment.
Altura dominated with some growling guitar lines, while Almazan underscored with keyboard stylings that were simultaneously as haunting as they were funky.
Ramsey meanwhile, provided a relentless, heady bass drive, and Seaton drove it all home with his impassioned, rolling percussion.
Songs chased each other and slid into one another, gliding from quiet lulls to embellished staccatos and culminating in dramatic crescendos.
Then of course, there was Blanchard himself.
Over the years, he has distinguished himself through his versatility and has performed in the hard-bop tradition as well as showcased his virtuoso talent though contemporary jazz.
Thursday he added electric jazz that brought echoing, reverberating striations to his potent playing.
A golden computer sat on stage and enhanced the nuances of what he does, serving as a tool rather than a centerpiece.
Ultimately, the evening was about more than jazz.
It was part of Blanchard’s ongoing call for social justice — even if only laconically stated at the end — and that call rang out long, strong and sustained.