ARTICLE
There is a growing movement to get tougher on cops and softer on crooks.
This may not end well.
The United States suffered a three-decade spike in crime rates beginning in the 1960s.
During that period, the percentage of crimes that resulted in arrests and arrests that resulted in incarceration dropped sharply.
In response to the rising crime rates, changes in incarceration policies and police priorities started to be implemented in the late 1980s.
Criminal sentences began to incorporate the incapacitation theory.
According to this theory, most predatory crime is committed by a small number of young men.
While individual crimes may not be solved, most of them ultimately get caught for something.
And if, when caught, they are put away, they will be incapacitated -- unable to commit additional crimes.
Sentences for criminal offenses became more certain and longer, particularly for repeat offenders.
The change in policing priorities was based on the broken windows concept, the observation that if a broken window in an abandoned building goes unrepaired, the other windows are soon broken as well.
Basically, that order begets order and disorder begets escalating disorder.
So, the police quit overlooking petty offenses, such as loitering or public urination, and began cracking down on them.
Crime rates started dropping in the 1990s, a trend that seems to be continuing.
The extent to which incapacitation sentencing and broken-windows policing caused or contributed to the decline in crime rates is hotly disputed.
There is, however, little to dispute about the timeline.
Crime went up as the consequences of it went down, and it went down as the consequences of it went up.
Harvard psychology professor Steven Pinker is hardly a conservative.
Yet in his book about the history of violence ("The Better Angels of our Nature"), he concludes that incapacitation sentencing and broken-windows policing are part of the explanation for the decline, although not the whole of it.
He also credits a rebound of what he calls the civilizing process, a strengthening of cultural norms against disorderly and predatory behavior.
Certainly broken-windows policing contributed greatly to some big cities, particularly New York, becoming safer and more livable.
Today, the lower crime rates are taken for granted.
And there is a pushback against broken-windows policing and incapacitation sentencing.
There is no question that broken-windows policing results in disproportionate arrests for petty offenses in low-income and minority neighborhoods.
That's where the broken windows, metaphorically speaking, are more likely to be.
And rather than welcoming the increased orderliness, residents of such areas seem increasingly to resent the greater scrutiny.
This has been turbocharged by the spate of recent killings of unarmed Blacks by White police officers.
The Obama administration has stepped up oversight of police departments.
City governments tend to be liberal and are increasing their own monitoring.
Generally, these efforts attempt to hold police departments to account for racial disparities in enforcement actions.
We know, however, how beat cops respond to such by-the-numbers second-guessing.
They start mailing it in.
In such a regimen, you aren't called to account for what you don't do.
The recent charges in the death of Freddie Gray will accentuate this.
Beat cops know that they will be subject to disciplinary measures for arrests without probable cause.
The Baltimore police officers in that case, however, were charged with a crime, false imprisonment.
There couldn't be a larger inducement to just look the other way.
Liberals and libertarian conservatives are taking aim at what they derisively call "mass incarceration."
Given how hopelessly interwoven drugs are with other crimes, I sympathize.
Who knows what crime rates would be if some recreational drugs were legal?
However, the movement to limit incarceration to violent offenses doesn't seem to be well thought out.
Do we really want to declare property crimes a jail-free behavior?
The police will abuse their authority.
Incarceration is expensive.
Having a criminal record locks people out of making a go of it in civil society.
These are things to worry about and try to abate.
But we should proceed cautiously in abandoning policies that at least coincided with curbing such a spike in predatory crime.